Believed to be responsible for hiring an assassin to murder Bran Stark while he lay in a coma, Tywin's son Tyrion is arrested at the inn at the crossroads by Catelyn Stark, the wife of Eddard Stark, current Hand of the King. She takes him to her sister Lysa, at the Eyrie, for trial. Though Tywin does not care about Tyrion's welfare, he sees the arrest and kidnapping as a direct slight on House Lannister's honor which he will not tolerate. In response Tywin sends Ser Gregor Clegane and the Mountain's men, disguised as brigands, to sack and pillage various villages and hamlets across the riverlands, Catelyn's homeland.[22] These raids mark one of the seminal points in what is to become the War of the Five Kings.

Tywin's aim is to draw Eddard out of King's Landing, capture him, and exchange him for the freedom of his son.[23] Eddard, however, is injured in a skirmish on the streets of King's Landing with Tywin's son Jaime, who is unaware of Tywin's plans, and Eddard sends Lord Beric Dondarrion after Gregor in his stead. When Beric's forces reach the Mummer's Ford, soldiers of Tywin's and Gregor's attack from all sides, routing Beric's host.[24]

As the war gains momentum, Tywin's forces take the majority of the riverlands and lay siege to Riverrun before meeting their first real opposition in the battle on the Green Fork. Just prior to the battle, Tyrion, having won his freedom from the Vale of Arryn via trial by combat and earned the loyalty of many of the Vale mountain clans along the way, meets with his father. Tywin sends Tyrion and his clansmen into the battle on the left flank, believing the undisciplined men likely to rout, but giving the northern commander, which Tywin believed to be the young and inexperienced Robb Stark, a chance to over-commit and be annihilated.[25] The clansmen do not rout, however, and the northern commander is not Robb but instead the more cautious and experienced Lord Roose Bolton. The battle is a Lannister victory, but it buys enough time for a separate northern force under Robb Stark's command to cross the Trident at the Twins. With the battle in the Whispering Wood and the Battle of the Camps, Robb is able to capture Tywin's other son, Jaime, and lift the siege of Riverrun.[26]

After the death of King Robert I Baratheon, Tywin is named Hand of the King for his grandson, Joffrey I Baratheon.[27] Tywin does not trust the "jackanapes" on the small council: master of coin Petyr Baelish, Pycelle, and master of whisperers Varys. After the battle he sends Tyrion to King's Landing to serve as Hand in his stead, control the small council and Joffrey, and to prepare the city's defenses in anticipation of an attack from one or both of Robert's brothers, Stannis and Renly, while Tywin manages the war with the North and the Riverlands.[26]

A Clash of Kings
The loss of Riverrun means that Tywin is not able to pursue and destroy Roose Bolton's forces. Instead he marches south to Harrenhal while he ponders his next move. Lannister men in the riverlands are harassed by Beric Dondarrion's outlaw brotherhood, despite Beric having been reported as slain several times.[19]

Robb Stark, now the King in the North, marches from Riverrun and invades the westerlands, smashing a new Lannister host being raised and trained by Stafford Lannister at Oxcross and turning his forces loose to scour the westerlands. With Renly mysteriously killed and the loyalties of his men disputed,[28][29] Tywin leaves Harrenhal and marches his forces west in pursuit of Robb,[30] gambling that Stannis will be occupied with the siege of Storm's End.[31][32] With Tywin gone, however, the Brave Companions abandon the Lannister cause and betray Harrenhal to Lord Bolton.[33]

Robb and Ser Brynden Tully plan to lead Tywin's army on a long chase across the westerlands, bleeding his forces and living off of their lands.[34] However, Ser Edmure Tully, who has been tasked with holding Riverrun but is unaware of Robb's plan, meets Tywin's army in the field in the Battle of the Fords.[35] Tywin's forces are bloodied and thrown back, but the delay allows word to reach Tywin that Stannis has unexpectedly[31] taken formidable Storm's End and laid claim to much of Renly's army, and that he is marching and sailing on King's Landing with an enormous force.[36][32]

Tywin turns his host southeast on a forced march to the headwaters of the Blackwater Rush, where he meets Lords Mathis Rowan and Randyll Tarly of the newly-allied Reach. They then join with the forces of Lord Mace Tyrell at Tumbler's Falls.[34] Sailing together on barges down the Blackwater Rush, the Lannisters and Tyrells arrive just in time for the waning moments of the Battle of the Blackwater, where they are able to break and drive away the majority of Stannis's army, which had been on the cusp of victory, by taking them in the flank.[34] Tywin commands the host's right flank during the battle.[37] Tywin is declared Savior of the City by King Joffrey I Baratheon. Tywin's son Tyrion, who had done much for the city's defenses, is critically wounded in the fighting.[38]

A Storm of Swords
Tywin's timely arrival at the Battle of the Blackwater allows him to take the majority of the credit for the Lannister victory. Tywin assumes his official position as King Joffrey's Hand,[39] while giving Tyrion, after his recovery, the position of Master of Coin, which Tyrion sees as a demotion and an insult. Tywin arranges for Tyrion to be wed to Sansa Stark[12] before she can be betrothed to Willas Tyrell, giving him claim over Winterfell and directly denying Tyrion's ambition to inherit Casterly Rock.[38] He also makes plans to find a suitor to marry his widowed daughter, Queen Cersei, though they are never realized. He offers her to Willas Tyrell but Mace Tyrell, after being hectored by his mother, Olenna Redwyne, refuses the match. Tywin demands that Tyrion act as if the offer were never made.[40]

After learning that Robb Stark has unexpectedly wed Jeyne Westerling and that House Westerling has gone over to the Starks, Tywin remains in communication, via raven, with Jeyne's mother Sybell Spicer. He also communicates with Roose Bolton, who has switched sides to the Lannisters after taking Harrenhal, and Lord Walder Frey, who sees Robb's marriage to Jeyne as an insult to House Frey, as it breaks a marriage pact Robb had previously made to wed a Frey girl. The Red Wedding is the direct result of their correspondence, which sees Robb Stark betrayed and murdered along with the vast majority of his host, effectively ending the war with House Lannister the victor.

Tywin Lannister has Ice, the Valyrian steel greatsword of Eddard Stark, reforged into two longswords as gifts, one for Joffrey on his wedding day and the other to Jaime.[40] Not long after, King Joffrey is poisoned and dies at the feast following his wedding to Margaery Tyrell. Tywin's son Tyrion is falsely accused of the crime, and Tywin agrees to be one of Tyrion's three judges, alongside Oberyn Martell and Mace Tyrell, at his trial. When it becomes clear that he is going to be found guilty, Tyrion demands trial by combat, and Oberyn surprisingly volunteers to champion him. Cersei, being Tyrion's accuser, selects Ser Gregor Clegane to represent the crown. Gregor, despite being poisoned by Oberyn during the trial, wins the duel, slaying Oberyn, and Tyrion is thus found guilty.[41]

Tywin faces huge political ramifications from the trial. Before slaying Oberyn, Gregor roars his guilt in slaying Elia Martell and her son Aegon for all the realm to hear. Tywin fears Dorne might join Stannis Baratheon, which could prolong the war for years. He plans on having Gregor executed to appease House Martell, but needs it to be seen to be the King's Justice who carries out the deed, not poison. Tywin commands Pycelle to heal Gregor, but Pycelle's efforts prove fruitless.[42]

Awaiting his sentencing, Tyrion is freed from the Red Keep's dungeon by his brother Jaime and a reluctant Varys. During his escape, Jaime reveals the truth about Tyrion's first wife Tysha, saying she was not a whore but a girl just met on the road and Tywin had made Jaime speak the lie to Tyrion. Tyrion is enraged by this and has Varys show him to a ladder that leads directly into the Tower of the Hand, Tywin's residence, Tyrion finds his ex-lover Shae in Tywin's bed, wearing nothing but his father's golden chain of office. Tyrion strangles her to death with it. He then takes a crossbow from the wall and finds Tywin in the privy and confronts him about Tysha. Tywin remains belligerent, repeatedly calling her a whore, which Tyrion sees as the final insult; shooting him through his bowels with the crossbow, mortally wounding him. Tywin dies while seated on the privy, his bowels loosening in the moment of death causing Tyrion to think as he left his father's body:

But the stink that filled the privy gave ample evidence that the oft-repeated jape about his father was just another lie. Lord Tywin Lannister did not, in the end, shit gold.[6]

A Feast for Crows
After Tywin's body is discovered, it is prepared for a state burial. Cersei has the Kettleblacks remove the body of Shae and swears she will have the tongue removed of any man who mentions Shae was ever there.[13] The remains of Lord Tywin are shown for seven days in the Great Sept of Baelor before making its way west with an entourage of knights and lords from the westerlands. The smell of the body is so bad many of the mourners grow sick or faint from being too near. A drying of the mouth also causes Tywin's lips to curl up and make him appear to smile.[43] This disturbs Jaime and Cersei, because Tywin Lannister seldom smiled.

A Dance with Dragons
Now in Essos, on his way to meet up with the crew of the Shy Maid, Tyrion listens to what Illyrio Mopatis has to say about Daenerys Targaryen and he wonders,

Are you down in some hell, Father? A nice cold hell where you can look up and see me help restore Mad Aerys's daughter to the Iron Throne?[44]

Ser Kevan Lannister thinks of how Tywin would never have dreamed his golden daughter Cersei would experience a similar fate, a walk of shame, as Tywin made their father Tytos's mistress suffer.[45]

Quotes by Tywin
No man is free. Only children and fools think elsewise.[21]

—Tywin, to Tyrion Lannister
Some battles are won with swords and spears, others with quills and ravens.[38]

—Tywin, to Tyrion Lannister
Tyrion: Could the Westerlings and Spicers be such great fools as to believe the wolf can defeat the lion?
Tywin: The greatest fools are ofttimes more clever than the men who laugh at them.[12]

—Tywin and Tyrion Lannister
There is a tool for every task, and a task for every tool.[40]

—Tywin, to Tyrion Lannister
When your enemies defy you, you must serve them steel and fire. When they go to their knees, however, you must help them back to their feet. Elsewise no man will ever bend the knee to you. And any man who must say 'I am the king' is no true king at all. Aerys never understood that, but you will. When I've won your war for you, we will restore the king's peace and the king's justice.[17]

—Tywin, to Joffrey Baratheon
I did not fight a war to seat Robert the Second on the Iron Throne.[17]

— Tywin, to Cersei Lannister
You are not my son. You say you are the Lord Commander of the Kingsguard, and only that. Very well, ser. Go do your duty.[46]

—Tywin, to Jaime Lannister
Tywin: I suppose the steward sent her on her way. I never thought to inquire.
Tyrion: On her way where?
Tywin: Wherever whores go.[6]
—Tywin and Tyrion Lannister, regarding Tysha
Tywin: You shot me.
Tyrion: You always were quick to grasp a situation, my lord, that must be why you're the Hand of the King.
Tywin: You ... you are no ... no son of mine.
Tyrion: Now that's where you’re wrong, Father. Why, I believe I'm you writ small. Do me a kindness now, and die quickly. I have a ship to catch. [6]
—Tywin and Tyrion Lannister
Quotes about Tywin
I would sooner entrust a child to a pit viper than to Lord Tywin.[47]

—Eddard Stark's thoughts
A fool more foolish than most had once jested that even Lord Tywin’s shit was flecked with gold. Some said the man was still alive, deep in the bowels of Casterly Rock.[1]

—Tyrion Lannister's thoughts
Every once in a very long while, Lord Tywin Lannister would actually threaten to smile; he never did, but the threat alone was terrible to behold.[12]

—Tyrion Lannister's thoughts
Joffrey: You talk about Aerys, Grandfather, but you were scared of him.
Cersei: Joffrey, apologize to your grandfather.
Joffrey: Why should I? Everyone knows it’s true. My father won all the battles. He killed Prince Rhaegar and took the crown, while your father was hiding under Casterly Rock.[17]
—Joffrey Baratheon and Cersei Lannister
Kevan: Tywin seems a hard man to you, but he's no harder than he's had to be. Our own father was gentle and amiable, but so weak his bannermen mocked him in their cups. Some saw fit to defy him openly. Other lords borrowed his gold and never troubled to repay it. At court they japed of toothless lions. Even his own mistress stole from him. A woman scarcely one step above a whore, and she helped herself to my mother's jewels! It fell to Tywin to restore House Lannister to its proper place. Just as it fell to him to rule this realm, when he was no more than twenty. He bore that heavy burden for twenty years and all it earned him was a mad king's envy. Instead of the honor he deserved, he was made to suffer slights beyond count, yet he gave the Seven Kingdoms peace, plenty and justice. He is a just man.
Tyrion: You love him.
Kevan: He is my brother.[10]
—Kevan Lannister and Tyrion Lannister
Lord Tywin Lannister did not, in the end, shit gold.[6]

—Tyrion Lannister's thoughts
I have served six kings, but here before us lies the greatest man I ever knew. Lord Tywin wore no crown, yet he was all a king should be.[43]

—Pycelle
...I remember the first time my father took me to court, Robert had to hold my hand. I could not have been older than four, which would have made him five or six. We agreed afterward that the king had been as noble as the dragons were fearsome. Years later, our father told us that Aerys had cut himself on the throne that morning, so his Hand had taken his place. It was Tywin Lannister who’d so impressed us.[48]

—Stannis Baratheon
Men say Tywin never smiled, but he smiled when he wed your mother, and when Aerys made him Hand. When Tarbeck Hall came crashing down on Lady Ellyn, that scheming bitch, Tyg claimed he smiled then, and he smiled at your birth, Jaime, I saw with my own eyes.[14]

—Genna Lannister, to Jaime Lannister
I was seven when Walder Frey persuaded my lord father to give my hand to Emm. His second son, not even his heir. Father was himself a thirdborn son, and younger children crave the approval of their elders. Frey sensed that weakness in him, and Father agreed for no better reason than to please him. My betrothal was announced at a feast with half the west in attendance. Ellyn Tarbeck laughed and the Red Lion went angry from the hall. The rest sat on their tongues. Only Tywin dared speak against the match. A boy of ten. Father turned as white as mare's milk, and Walder Frey was quivering. How could I not love him after that? That is not to say I approved of all he did, or much enjoyed the company of the man he became ... but every little girl needs a big brother to protect her. Tywin was big even when he was little.[14]

—Genna Lannister, to Jaime Lannister